Scrum Foundation Professional Certification

SCRUM => lightweight framework that helps people, teams and organizations generate value through adaptive solutions for complex problems

Requires a scrum master to foster an environment where:
1. A Product Owner orders the work for a complex problem into a Product Backlog.
2. The Scrum Team turns a selection of the work into an Increment of value during a Sprint.
3. The Scrum Team and its stakeholders inspect the results and adjust for the next Sprint.
4. Repeat

Scrum is built upon by the collective intelligence of the people using it;
The rules o Scrum guide their relationships and interactions;

Scrum theory => scrum is founded on empiricism and lean thinking;
empiricism asserts that knowledge comes from experience and making decisions based on what is observed.
lean thinking reduces waste and focuses on the essentials.

Scrum employs an iterative, incremental approach to optimize predictability and to control risk. Scrum engages groups of people who collectively have all the skills and expertise to do the work and share or acquire such skills as needed.

Scrum combines four formal events for inspection and adaptation within a containing event, the Sprint. These events work because they implement the empirical Scrum pillars of transparency, inspection, and adaptation.


SCRUM PILARS =>
- Transparency: the work must be visible to those performing the work as well as those receiving the work;
Artifacts that have low transparency can lead to decisions that diminish value and increase risk.
Transparency enables inspection. Inspection without transparency is misleading and wasteful.
- Inspection: The Scrum artifacts and the progress toward agreed goals must be inspected frequently and diligently to detect potentially undesirable variances or problems;
Inspection enables adaptation. Inspection without adaptation is considered pointless. Scrum events are designed to provoke change.
- Adaptation: If any aspects of a process deviate outside acceptable limits or if the resulting product is unacceptable, the process being applied or the materials being produced must be adjusted. The adjustment must be made as soon as possible to minimize further deviation.
Adaptation becomes more difficult when the people involved are not empowered or self-managing. A Scrum Team is expected to adapt the moment it learns anything new through inspection.

SCRUM VALUES =>
- Commitment;
- Focus;
- Openness;
- Respect;
- Courage;

SCRUM TEAM => 
- 1 PO (Product owner) - responsável por product backlog e requisitos; is accountable for maximizing the value of the product resulting from the work of the Scrum Team. How this is done may vary widely across organizations, Scrum Teams, and individuals;
    Developing and explicitly communicating the Product Goal;
    Creating and clearly communicating Product Backlog items;
    Ordering Product Backlog items; and,
    Ensuring that the Product Backlog is transparent, visible and understood.

    The Product Owner may do the above work or may delegate the responsibility to others. Regardless, the Product Owner remains accountable.

- 1 Scrum master - organizador; The Scrum Master is accountable for establishing Scrum as defined in the Scrum Guide. They do this by helping everyone understand Scrum theory and practice, both within the Scrum Team and the organization; 
    Scrum Masters are true leaders who serve the Scrum Team and the larger organization.

The Scrum Master serves the Scrum Team in several ways, including:
● Coaching the team members in self-management and cross-functionality;
● Helping the Scrum Team focus on creating high-value Increments that meet the Definition of
Done;
● Causing the removal of impediments to the Scrum Team’s progress; and,
● Ensuring that all Scrum events take place and are positive, productive, and kept within the
timebox.

The Scrum Master serves the Product Owner in several ways, including:
● Helping find techniques for effective Product Goal definition and Product Backlog management;
● Helping the Scrum Team understand the need for clear and concise Product Backlog items;
● Helping establish empirical product planning for a complex environment; and,
● Facilitating stakeholder collaboration as requested or needed.

The Scrum Master serves the organization in several ways, including:
● Leading, training, and coaching the organization in its Scrum adoption;
● Planning and advising Scrum implementations within the organization;
● Helping employees and stakeholders understand and enact an empirical approach for complex work; and,
● Removing barriers between stakeholders and Scrum Teams.


- dev team - the people of te scrum team that are commited to creating any aspect of a usable increment each sprint; The specific skills needed by the Developers are often broad and will vary with the domain of work;
    Creating a plan for the Sprint, the Sprint Backlog;
    Instilling quality by adhering to a Definition of Done;
    Adapting their plan each day toward the Sprint Goal; and,
    Holding each other accountable as professionals.


SCRUM EVENTS => 

The sprint is a container for all other events; Each event in Scrum is a formal opportunity to inspect and adapt scrum artifacts;

SPRINT => They are fixed length events of one month or less to create consistency. A new sprint starts immediately after the conclusion of the previous one;
All the work necessary to achieve the Product Goal, including sprint planning, daily scrums, sprint review and sprint retrospective, happen with sprints;

during the sprint:
- no changes are made that would endanger the goal;
- quality does not decrease;
- the product backlog is refined as needed;
- Scope may be clarified and renegotiated with the product owner as more is learned;

A sprint could be cancelled if the psrint goal becomes obsolete. Only the PO has the authority to cancel the sprint;

Sprint planning => initiates the sprint by laying out the work to be performed for the sprint. This resulting plan is created by the collaborative work of the entire scrum team;
The Product Owner ensures that attendees are prepared to discuss the most important Product Backlog items and how they map to the Product Goal. The Scrum Team may also invite other people to attend Sprint Planning to provide advice.

The whole scrum team collaborates to define a sprint Goal;

Topics of sprint planning => 

1 - Why is this sprint valuable?
2 - What can be done in this sprint?
Through discussion with the Product Owner, the Developers select items from the Product Backlog to include in the current Sprint. The Scrum Team may refine these items during this process, which increases understanding and confidence.
3 - How will the chosen work get done?
For each selected Product Backlog item, the Developers plan the work necessary to create an Increment that meets the Definition of Done. This is often done by decomposing Product Backlog items into smaller work items of one day or less

The Sprint Goal, the Product Backlog items selected for the Sprint, plus the plan for delivering them are together referred to as the Sprint Backlog.
Sprint Planning is timeboxed to a maximum of eight hours for a one-month Sprint. For shorter Sprints,
the event is usually shorter


Daily Scrum => The purpose of the Daily Scrum is to inspect progress toward the Sprint Goal and adapt the Sprint Backlog as necessary, adjusting the upcoming planned work.
The Daily Scrum is a 15-minute event for the Developers of the Scrum Team. To reduce complexity, it is held at the same time and place every working day of the Sprint
If the Product Owner or Scrum Master are actively working on items in the Sprint Backlog, they participate as Developers.
Daily Scrums improve communications, identify impediments, promote quick decision-making, and consequently eliminate the need for other meetings. 

Sprint Review => The purpose of the Sprint Review is to inspect the outcome of the Sprint and determine future adaptations. The Scrum Team presents the results of their work to key stakeholders and progress toward the Product Goal is discussed.
The Sprint Review is the second to last event of the Sprint and is timeboxed to a maximum of four hours for a one-month Sprint. For shorter Sprints, the event is usually shorter
 
Sprint Retrospective => The purpose of the Sprint Retrospective is to plan ways to increase quality and effectiveness.

The Scrum Team inspects how the last Sprint went with regards to individuals, interactions, processes, tools, and their Definition of Done. Inspected elements often vary with the domain of work. Assumptions that led them astray are identified and their origins explored. The Scrum Team discusses what went well during the Sprint, what problems it encountered, and how those problems were (or were not) solved.
The Sprint Retrospective concludes the Sprint. It is timeboxed to a maximum of three hours for a onemonth Sprint. For shorter Sprints, the event is usually shorter.

Scrum Artifacts => Scrum’s artifacts represent work or value. They are designed to maximize transparency of key information. Thus, everyone inspecting them has the same basis for adaptation.

Each artifact contains a commitment to ensure it provides information that enhances transparency and focus against which progress can be measured:
● For the Product Backlog it is the Product Goal.
● For the Sprint Backlog it is the Sprint Goal.
● For the Increment it is the Definition of Done.
These commitments exist to reinforce empiricism and the Scrum values for the Scrum Team and their
stakeholders.

Product Backlog => 

The Scrum Team is small enough to remain nimble and large enough to complete significant work within a Sprint, typically 10 or fewer people.

scrum team é responsável por todas as atividades relacionadas ao produto;

perguntar pro gepeto topicos para ver antes de fazer a prova